======================================================================
Sylvia 4th Interview (1975)
Therapist: Dr. Carl Rogers
======================================================================

Carl: Hi.
Sylvia: Hi Carl. (They both sit down, facing each other.)
C: Good to see ya.
S 1: I’ve been looking forward to this moment.
C 1: Well, I’m eager to know what’s what with you.
S 2: (Looks down.) (Pause 8 seconds.) (Leans back.) Well, do you mean in terms of the
past year or right now?
1

This Sylvia, in session #4, is the same person as the client in the film “The Struggle for Self-Acceptance”
- session #5 with Sylvia.

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 21

C 2: Oh, right now, whatever your concerns are in your present life. (S: Mhm hm) I
guess that’s what I’m interested in.
S 2: Well, um, (smiles) I come here with an agenda, (C: Okay.) like, of a particular thing
I’d like to discuss with you. (C: All right.) And, and I think that discussing it will be
helpful in terms of my, of my life.
C 2: Uh-huh. Then that’s what I’d like you to discuss.
S 3: Well, I think I’m doing very well in many ways, and I need to do some work,
(C: M-hm.) too. (C: M-hm.) And, uh, the most pressing thing with me is that I plan
to go to work in the fall, (C: Nods.) full-time, (C: Nods.) and have the care of both
of my sons. (C: Nods.) Without any support other than what I’m earning. (4 second
pause.) And I, and I, I don’t feel very upset about it, but I believe that deep down in
my body I’m really afraid. (Smiles.)
C 3: Are you afraid of the responsibility or, or what aspect of it is most frightening?
S 4: Well what, what seems most frightening as I think about it is coming home from
work very tired (C: M-hm.) and having, um, two little boys that need a lot. (C: Mhm.) (Her voice quivers.)
C 4: Will you really be able to be a mother to them when they, (hands Sylvia tissue box.)
when you come home from work. Hmmm?
S 5: Well, I’m sure I can do it (gets teary) because I, it’s done every day. And, uh, the
women I know an… who are trying to do that are having a really hard time. (C: Mhm.) (3 seconds pause.) And I’ve been thinking about talking about this problem
now with you. I haven’t really… I, I talk about in a heady way with my friends,
and, uh, I haven’t given myself any real support (C: M-hm.) with it. It’s a real fear I

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 22

have, and it’ll probably be really hard. (C: M-hm.)
[Carl: It’s interesting that, uh, because she had saved up this problem to talk about that
the moment she begins to talk about it she begins to, to, uh, get teary - that’s why I
reached for the, uh, Kleenex, which she didn’t use. But, uh, it’s evident that, uh, though
she may have talked about it in a, in an intellectual fashion to her friends, uh, it really
does have a lot of emotional import for her.]
[Sylvia: Well, I, I don’t know if it’s obvious to you but I started to cry when I said that
and you know why, you know, I was feeling a lot of sadness.]
C 5: (Talking at the same time) And you haven’t really had a chance to explore it in, in
depth; you’ve talked about it more on a, on the surface level.
S 5: Well, the exploring I’ve done is… (3 seconds pause) I decided for myself- well
simple, I’ll look for other single working mothers (C: Nods.) with young children
who are doing well. (C: M-hm.) And I’ll talk to them and see what they do. (C: Mhm.) So I started asking, asking my friends, asking some people I know, “Do you
know of this kind of person?” Well after about a month, (quiet laugh) I didn’t come
up with one, (C: Is that right?) one single woman taking care of young children and
working full-time who was doing very well (C: Nods.) and that scared me.
C 6: So the track record, the track record that the other people have, the other women
have makes you really concerned about will you be able to do it?
S 7: Well that substantiates my concern.
C 8: Yeah. Yeah.
S 9: I’ve had the concern. (C: Yeah. M-hm.) (Pause 8 seconds.) (C: M-hm.) I wish,
(smiles.) I keep wishing I could find some secrets to make it easier for myself. And

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 23

the only secrets I can come up with are working half-time (C: Nods.) and being
really, like, no… (C: M-hm.) just barely, you know, paying rent and (C: M-hm.)
food and so forth and so on. (C: Mhm.) But, I do know how to do that (pauses) and
that may be what I decide to do.
C 9: It’s one possible option at any rate. Mhm.
S 10: But it seems like a real limited lifestyle.
C 10: It is clear to me from the, from the tears that came up the first that, that, uh, this is
something you feel a lot of concern about, isn’t it?
S 11: Oh, I feel I’m two things (crying). All alone (C: Mhm.) and somewhat doomed to
fail.
[Carl: I think, at this part, she was feeling, um, uh, quite discouraged after following a
very good plan. Some of the responses along here are almost mechanical, like, um, my
saying that’s another option. But then when I do pick up on the, uh, feeling that she had
exhibited at the first, it, uh, brings up fresh all of the feeling that’s, uh, stirred up around
that. And, uh, I think my response shows that I’m doing what I, what I customarily try to
do. It is to live in the client’s experience and to feel whatever she’s feeling. This is the
important thing to really go with the client into whatever feelings there are. And here I
really go with her into her sadness. At times I, uh, feel almost as though I’m speaking for
the client. And to me that’s, um, the relationship is good at those times. I feel as though,
uh, I’m in the client’s world. I’m saying things that she could be saying. And, uh, when
she says, “That’s right” it shows I have been right where she’s experiencing it.]
C 11: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.
S 12: And, uh, (clears throat) doomed to fail, not that I will die or (C: Mhm.) anything. I

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 24

think doomed to fail and to be there for my children (C: Mhm. Mhm.) in a
positive, cheerful, (C: Mhm.) warm, loving way. (C: Mhm. Mhm.) And being a
single parent, like I will be (C: Mhm.) their support system to a large extent. (C:
Mhm.) And it scares me to think of their main support as being exhausted (C:
Mhm.) and irritated (C: Mhm.) and (C: Mhm.) … (3 seconds pause.)
C 13: You just feel, “I may not be able to make it. I may be doomed (Sylvia smiles and
nods.) to failure by the very circumstances.”
S 14: Right. (Nods.) (C: Mhm.) (10 second pause.) And talking about it this way I feel
two ways: Like, “Oh c’mon Sylvia. Everybody else is doing it too.” And on the
other hand, like, you’re willing to sit here and talk (laughs) about it with me (C:
Mhm.) and I appreciate that. (Voice breaks.)
C 14: Mhm. Mhm. But you don’t have to just tell yourself, “Oh, buck up, you can do it.”
It’s, it gives you a good chance to really…
S 15: (Takes Kleenex and wipes eyes.) Right. Well, I do do that, “Buck up, you can do
it.” I’ll do that plenty. But I don’t get much opportunity to, (C: Nods.) to be sad
with somebody about it. (C: Yeah.) How hard it (C: Yeah.) seems. (Crying.)
C 15: Yeah. Yeah. That’s the thing isn’t it? That to be all alone, with no support from
anybody, it sounds like…
S 16: Well, I mean (C: I mean…) there are people that (C: Yeah, I know but…) care
about me. (C: But…) There’s, like, no financial (C: Yeah.) support. (C: Mhm.)
And it’s not like I’ll have my mother next door, (C: Mhm.) or something like that.
C 16: You’ll be alone with a heavy burden and it is a sad prospect really.
S 17: (Nods head.) (Pause 3 seconds.) It feels sad. (C: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.) And I get…

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 25

when I, (pauses) I depress myself by thinking, “Well, oh, sure I can give up my
children.” And I think, “Well, I won’t do that.” Um, I’m seeing it as a black or
white thing (C: Mhm.) and I know that’s not reality.
C 17: (Nods.) But it feels like reality. That either you’d have to give up your children or,
or else (S: Mhm.) make a go of it.
S 18: But then I also feel suspicious of myself. Like, “Well, Sylvia, you’re used to so
much of getting your needs met.” Like, going out at night sometimes, (C: Mhm.)
um, having friends, (C: Mhm.) and, and having a social life and not being overtired.
(C: Mhm.) And then I see myself as pampered. (C: Nods and smiles.) And, uh, if I
just wasn’t so pampered, (laughs) things would be a lot better.
C 18: That’s when you kind of scold yourself, (: Uh-huh.) really. Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.
(pause 7 seconds) So that you really feel you’re gonna be hemmed in by that. I
mean, your life is gonna be constricted (S: Mhm.) a good deal. A lot of the things
you’ve been used to you just won’t have.
S 19: And want for myself.
C 19: And want for yourself. (S: Nods.) Uh-huh.
S 20: Yeah, that’s right.
C 20: So really it does look like a very tough period, doesn’t it?
S 21: Yep. It does. (pause 13 seconds) But, I like being able to be sad and complain about
how terrible I’m afraid it’s going to be then I can… like now I’m feeling like, and
I’m excited too, you know, about facing it.
C 21: Sort of a new phase of your life? Is it… it has excitement as well as dread in it, I
guess.

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 26

S 21: (Nods.) Yeah about seeing what it will be like, (C: Mhm.) in fact. (C: Mhm.)
(Sighs).
[Sylvia: I smiled (C: Mhm .) a little bit there and I think that I was feeling like a relief of
tension or, um, I don’t know how to describe it but a relief of, of after crying and feeling
sad and then having that feeling pass (C: Mhm. to something else.]
[Carl: It’s, uh, it’s very often true that if, uh, I go with a client into sad or desperate or
negative feelings that (clears throat) then that satisfies that aspect of their experience
and then they can move on to something else. So that it’s very common to have positive
feelings, uh, follow, uh, very, uh, negative ones. Also I might just comment here that, uh,
these pauses seemed very brief to me, uh, but to some therapists, to some counselors, uh,
a pause is very hard to bear. I don’t find pauses hard to bear. This was her silence and
I was willing to let her have it and to speak up when she was ready. During those
pauses, I’m very quiet inside. Um, I really am quite content to wait. Uh, sometimes I am
reviewing what she has been experiencing. Um, but I’m not, uh, I’m not trying to look
ahead, and I’m not thinking about the process. I’m just trying to feel it as it might be
going on in her.]
C 21: It will be a new adventure but it’s one that, uh, you feel different ways about.
S 22: Mhm. Yeah. So that’s, that’s what I think about the most, in terms of a problem
area. (C: Mhm. Mhm.) Like, the (smiles) way I started crying it seemed like I just
couldn’t wait to get here and cry about it. (C: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.) It was a little
dramatic that way.
C 22: ‘Cos it is…well, it is, it is a real sad prospect. And one, I guess, that you don’t let
out too much to other people, the sad side of it.

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 27

S 23: Right, I don’t do that (C: Nods.) very well. I, (C: Mhm.) I am busy being strong
(C: Mhm.) unconsciously. Or I’m also busy being depressed. (C: Mhm.) (Sylvia
smiles) I’ve learned well. I believe being sad and scared are more dealing with (C:
Mhm. Mmm.) the problem.
C 23: Mhm. Yeah being, being frightened of what you’re taking on and sad of what
you’re losing for yourself. (S: Nods.) Those are two very real (S: Hmm.) feelings.
S 24: And I, (pauses) I also think that part of my fear and excitement is that I’ll be doing
something different. Like, I’ve never worked (C: Nods.) in, in my profession (C:
Mhm. Mhm.) and been like a confident, (C: Mhm.) single woman with young
children (C: Mhm.) who are doing well. (C: Mhm.) And it’s like, um, that’s what I
want for myself. (C: Mhm.) (Sylvia laughs.)
C 24: It’s a goal you’ve been working toward. (S: Nods.) Mhm. (3 seconds pause.) I
wonder sort of how do your children feel about this?
[Carl: Here I simply, um, followed my impulse because I found myself thinking about her
children, I raised that question with her. Uh, whether that was a good move or not from
a counseling point of view is, uh, hard to say until we see what happens next. You might
think in viewing this that, uh, I had, uh, thought about what was going on and decided,
“Here’s a, uh, here’s a piece that’s missing. Here’s something she hasn’t talked about.”
Actually that’s not the process that goes on in me. Uh, I try to be open to whatever wells
up in me and to say that, to, to act more, uh, from my inner feelings then from, from
thinking about the process.]
S 25: Well, my youngest son wants me to go work (C: Nods.) so that we can have more
(C: Mhm.) money and so that he can have more spending money. And, uh, my

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 28

oldest son has not, at this time, agreed to live with me yet. (C: Mmm.) But I’m
preparing (C: Mhm.) with the hopes that he will at that time. (C: Mhm.) He is
living with… he will be living with me the rest of the summer.
C 25: Mhm. So that’s another new part of the…
S 26: And my oldest son and I have a very strained relationship. He hasn’t been living
with me the last two years. And so that’s gonna be another difficult part of what
I’m talking about (C: Mhm.) is, um, at the same time needing and wanting to
improve my relationship with Senate (C: Mhm.) and hoping there’ll be money for
counseling. I’m hoping (C: Mhm.) that we can do work with a third party or in (C:
Mhm.) a, uh, family group of some sort (C: Mhm.) because I believe that we’ll
need help. (C: Mhm.) And, uh, so that’s, that, that part of the fall or the coming
year scares me too about feeling so alienated from Senate.
C 26: “Will he, will he really accept me as a mother?”
[Sylvia: Well, he says, “Will he really accept as a mother” to me that is showing me he is
listening to what I’m saying. (C: Mhm.) And that even, um, (pauses) I don’t know if it
was or not at that time but it could be very easily have been a, a helper to me to help me
focus with what I was, um, wrestling with in terms of understanding or clarifying for
myself what I was thinking about it.]
S 27: (Phone rings) As his mother, (C: Yeah.) as someone who loves him (C: Mhm.) and
cares about him.
C 27: So that’s a concern to ya, too.
S 28: (Nods.) (3 seconds pause.) Mhm. And can we get along? Can we live together? We
haven’t lived together, and he’s lived in a very different lifestyle.

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 29

C 28: “Can we really form a relationship of the kind that both of us would like?”
S 29: Pardon?
C 29: Your asking yourself, “Can we really form a relationship that both of us will like?”
S 30: (Nods.) Mhm. Yeah, and be happy and, (C: Mhm.) yeah… (8 seconds pause.)
(Smiles.) That’s an important… I hadn’t thought of that on my own, but you
mentioning my children (C: Mhm.) brings up the part about Senate, which is a
very important part of what I think about. (C: Mhm.) And I’m happy I’ll have him
with us (C: Nods.) during the summer and we’ll be able to have time.
C 30: You can get a start on that. Mhm.
S 31: Mhm. Yeah. (C: Mhm.) When I’m not working, (smiles and nods) for example.
(Pause 24 seconds.) Well, I felt awfully rigid about this upcoming filming. (C:
Nods.) I felt it in my body a lot. And I feel, I felt more relaxed since we started.
C 31: Mhm. Mhm. (Pause 4 seconds.) It’s a really difficult thing.
S 32: Mhm. (Pauses.) Right, and just the same it’s exciting (C: Mhm.) to come (C:
Mhm.) on this trip and to see you again (C: Mhm.) and it’s also frightening a lot.
(C: Mhm.) Ya know, who’s gonna see it? And what are they gonna think? (C:
Mhm.) And what’s it gonna look like? (C: Mhm.) Am I, am I being hard on
myself or am I being good to myself? I don’t know - to put myself in this position
(C: Yeah.) is what I mean.
C 32: Yeah. (Pause.) You have quite a little of conflict about, “Should I really be doing
this? Who, who will see it? (S: Nods.) What will they say? Am I wise?”
S 33: Uh-huh. What’s it gonna be? What’s the finished project, gonna be? (C: Mhm.)
(Clears throat.) Will I ever see it? (C: Mhm.) (Both smile.) (10 second pause.)

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 30

[Sylvia: To put myself in a position, um, where I’ll be… I was disclosing very private
things about myself where other people, I have no idea who all, may be viewing this and
making their own judgments, and, um, exposing myself, (clears throat) that seems hard
and, uh, being good to myself, being willing to go through the hardness for the
opportunity of learning and experience of Carl. That, I think, is being very good for
myself.]
[Carl: Sylvia has been quite aware of the filming but has had what I believe is a very
good attitude toward it. Uh, that she hopes that by being as natural as she can in the
interviews, she’ll be making a contribution to the counseling field. Both in the interviews
a year ago and clearly in this interview, the relationship with me has been very important
to Sylvia.]
C 33: (Pause 10 seconds.) Looks to me as though your eyes are saying something, but I
don’t know what. (Smiles and laughs.)
S 34: Well, I’m thinking about how moved I’ve been when I’ve heard your voice a few
times over the past year. (C: Hmm.) And now I’m here.
C 34: That made a…
S 35: I wanna take it in – (C: Mhm.) being here.
C 35: Mhm. (Pause 3 seconds.) I guess you’re saying that I mean a good deal to you.
S 36: Well, this time with you. (Nods.) Yes, you, mhm. (Smiles) (Pause 12 seconds) I’m
thinking about what I want to talk about or I’m feeling kind of empty right now
about talking. (Pause 5 seconds.)
C 36: Can you tell me what I do mean to you?
S 37: (Smiles.) Yes, I can. (Pause 8 seconds.) Well, (Pause 4 seconds) I think the best

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 31

thing that I like to think about you is that as I understand your writings, I have not
read very much that you’ve written, but that you have, that you live what you write
about. And my understanding of a lot of popular writers are they write one thing
and somehow they just don’t quite live that. They live something very different.
And so I think of you as, (laughs) um, (pauses) wonderful in that way and not,
uh… (Pause 3 seconds.)
C 37: But what does that mean to you?
S 38: (Sighs.) (Pause 3 seconds.) Well that it’s what I would like to be more: (C: Mhm.
Mhm.) to have values and be able to, to do them (pauses) and to live them.
C 38: (Pause 4 seconds.) You’d like to have a good match between your life (S: Mhm.)
and what you believe (S: Mhm. Mhm.) and value.
S 39: (Pause 3 seconds.) And what I also sense about you is, uh, like “patience” isn’t the
right word, but I see you as being comfortable with yourself so much so that
whatever I or anyone else says or does, doesn’t (pause 3 seconds) get you uptight.
C 39: (Laughs.)
S 40: (Laughing.) And maybe it does. (C: Mhm.) Sometimes it probably does ‘cause
you’re a human being.
C 40: It certainly does, that’s right.
S 41: But it doesn’t seem like it does (C: Mhm. Mhm.) too much.
[Carl: I really was not quite accepting of her, uh, of her feeling that, uh, in the
relationship I clearly was not uptight. It strikes me that what she’s saying here is, uh,
practically a, uh, statement of the, uh, attitudes that, uh, we have found most effective in
therapy. She’s saying that she experiences me as being genuine. Uh, she experiences me

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 32

as caring about her. Uh, and I think it’s quite clear that she feels that I understand her
empathically. And those are the elements that, uh, both in experience and in research
have shown up as being the most, uh, potent elements in a counseling relationship.]
S 42: And I like that. I would like to be more present (C: Nods.) and, and comfortable
with myself so that other people, including my children and so forth and so on,
could do what they do, and that I could be able to be a source of support and not be
personally threatened (C: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.) by this little thing and that little
thing.
C 42: And that, that has meaning to me. You’d like to be sufficiently accepting of
yourself, that then you can be comfortable with what your children do or what
other people do (S: Nods.) and not, uh, (S: Mhm.) not feel frightened, (S: Hmm.)
thrown off balance.
S 43: (Nods.) Mhm. And I’ve enjoyed through the year in the few letters that I’ve gotten
from you, your warmth, and interest in me, in my life. I’ve liked that a lot from
(C: Mhm.) you. And at the time those letters were written we had no plans to (C:
No.) make a movie (C: No.) or all that stuff so that was really enjoyable. (Pause 5
seconds.) Do you feel answered well?
C 43: Yeah. Mhm. Mhm. (Pause 15 seconds.) And I’m interested enough in you to
know of any other things in your life that are important to you or that, uh, that are
difficult for ya, or whatever.
S 44: (Pause 15 seconds.) Well, I’d like to go one of two ways. I don’t know which yet.
Uh, one way would be back to the single working mother business. I’m not sure
where we might go with that, but I know it’s a big thing for me. And another way

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 33

would be to go with the difficulty I see myself in having with my relationships
with men. (C: Mhm. Mmm.) (Pause 3 seconds.) I do so much analyzing (smiles)
that I, I feel like throwing up my hands. “What’s the use of even talking about it?”
But I…
C 44: But you do have (S: I…) difficulties in…
S 45: Yeah. I’ll, I’ll go with the men. (C: Okay.) And that’s the most frightening thing
for me to talk about (C: Mhm.) on this film because people that I know will
probably be seeing this (C: Mhm.) and men that I know. (4 second pause.) I see
myself, uh, and this, this is real scattered in my mind. (Sighs.) Scattered, (smiles)
and looking every which way. (C: Mhm.) Well, I see myself making acquaintance
with men, many men, I mean not just one man (C: Mhm.) and spending some time
with that person. And then, um, feeling that they lost interest in me or that I turned
them off. And I tell myself things like, “You can’t expect every man you meet to
fall in love with you.” (C: Mhm.) And, um, let’s see, (smiles) what else? (C: But
you feel that you…) Oh and then I’ll tell myself all these reasonable… “Of course
this man doesn’t like me because I’m this and I’m that and.…” But, I don’t very
often feel the disappointment and confusion about “Well I had a good time with
that man.” And it seems to me like he must not have had a good time with me
because I didn’t hear from him again, or I did and things went such and such a
way. And, uh…
C 45: Sounds like it seems kind of mysterious to you. (S: Uh-huh.) Why the men lose
interest in you.
S 46: Uh-huh. And then I have feedback from one person, one man friend of mine, who

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 34

says that I create, ya know I turn people off, men, myself. And so it’s like it’s all,
it’s all my doing anyway. (C: Mhm.) But I have felt lately impotent about how to,
(Pause 7 seconds.) how to have a successful long rel- long lasting relationship with
a man. Successful, I don’t mean perfect, I mean (C: Yeah. Mhm.) workable. (C:
Mhm.) And, uh, I think workable is successful (C: Mhm.) these days. (Smiles.)
Yeah.
C 46: Well, that’s a part of your life in which you just haven’t had the kind of, um,
success that you wish you had had. Mhm. Mhm. An important lack in some way.
S 47: (Nods.) Now I’m remembering we talked about this before.
C 47: A little bit.
S 48: A little bit, right. (Sighs.) (Pause 7 seconds.) And I do that, the kind of analyzing
that ‘”Well I have all these habits like, uh, I, um, I like to be by myself, I’m not
real generous and outgoing (C: Nods.) and taking care of, of people that I meet.”
And the woman that I live with says that she doesn’t see me doing that at all like,
“Oh come in I’ll fix you dinner, I’ll do this, I’ll do that.” Like I don’t do that. (C:
Nods) And, and so I’m confused about do I need to do that to be in a close
relationship? It doesn’t seem to me like I should (C: Mhm.) need to sell out to be
um enjoyed and wanted.
C 48: I gather what you mean by “selling out” is that if you, if you really put yourself out
in kind of an artificial way, you don’t want that. Is that what you’re saying?
[Carl: This is a good example of a client experiencing confusion. And, uh, she tries to be,
to talk about it rationally. But it’s clear that what she is experiencing is just confusion
itself. I feel this could have been a better response had I really heard her feeling that she

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 35

is powerless in, her, uh, relationships with men that she simply doesn’t have what it takes
to build a workable relationship. I believe this feeling that, uh, “I have some fundamental
lack in myself” is one of the commonest feelings that one meets in counseling situations.
Almost all of us at times feel “there must be some terrible flaw in me or I wouldn’t have
such problems in my life.”]
S 49: Yes, if I do all these things for a man, so then he’ll want me.
C 49: Mhm. Kind of buying his favor, (S: Nods. Mhm.) as it were. And you just don’t
see yourself doing that. Don’t wanna do that.
S 50: Or wanting to do it. (C: Mhm. Mhm.) (S: Nods.) And then I… another question,
hard question, I ask myself is, “Well, I’m choosing men to relate to that don’t know
how to give in the way that I want to be given to.” (C: Mhm. Mhm.) And then I try
(smiles) to figure that one out. (C: Mhm.) “Oh simple, I’m choosing, that just
means I need to choose differently.” (C: Mhm.) And then I look around and it
doesn’t seem so simple.
C 50: Mhm. You say you’re trying to analyze and analyze and analyze what, “what lack
in me?” or “you know what lack in me?’ I guess your asking yourself mostly,
“What lack in me keeps, (S: Hmm.) keeps me from having a lasting (S: Mhm.)
relationship with men?”
S 51: And one thing that now I’m recalling that really frightened me was I was talking- I
lived with my husband for eight years (C: Nods.) and I felt rejected by him and I
left him. (C: Nods.) And I left him for a man I was very much in love with that
I’ve been very close to (C: Mhm.) for five years. But he’s also… like, I moved
away from him but I felt left (smiles) by him also. And so this man friend of mine

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 36

said to me, “Well, what’s wrong with you that you can’t keep a man?” And that,
uh, that really scared me inside because when I look at the situation in a practical,
sensible way that doesn’t seem like reality. (C: Mhm.) But then I don’t know
maybe it’s true.
C 51: But that her saying that (S: He.) he saying that, (S: Uh-huh.) uh, really does touch
something in you. “Is there something wrong with me (S: Uh-huh.) that I….“
S 52: That I don’t see. (C: Mhm.) And, and, uh, just the fact that it touched me so much
shows me that there’s something there.
C 52: Mhm. It, (S: Sighs.) it wouldn’t bother you that much, or you wouldn’t think so
much about it if there wasn’t something in you that that refers to.
S 53: Mhm. (Nods.) And I, (sighs) I see my mother that way a lot, that my mother not
being able to have a successful relationship with a man and so that’s been my
model and… (Pause 3 seconds) like, why can’t…
C 53: You’re saying, “Maybe, maybe I’m just following the same pattern as my mother.”
S 54: Mhm. Well, I am in that respect and I don’t like it. (C: Mhm.) And I’m not willing
to do a bunch of crummy stuff that I… (C: Mhm.) (Pause 6 seconds.) So, right now
(smiles) I’m living alone (C: Mhm.) and I’m not doing any crummy stuff. (C:
Mhm.) And I also have some very nice relationships. It’s (smiles) those shades of
black and white. (Pause 8 seconds.) But I do feel a lot of confusion about building
an intimate relationship. (C: Mhm.) A monogamous type (C: Mhm. Mhm.) or
primary…
C 54: So you can have good times and all that, but still there is this nagging question or
these nagging questions, “Am I just following my mother’s pattern?” “What is

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 37

wrong with me that I don’t have a permanent relationship with a man?”
[Sylvia: I don’t ever recall feeling like Carl wasn’t understanding me or… because if I
did have that feeling there was something I could do about it right then and there in
terms of helping him to better understand me, so then I did feel understood. His intention
was to very much to be with me and, uh, if I got the sense that he wasn’t that we could
talk about that.]
[Carl: I think this interview is a good example of the fact that, uh, when the relationship
is good, the client is able to take more and more risks. Sylvia begins with material which
is quite present in her awareness, and yet by the end of the interview she is dipping into
material which she doesn’t understand, which she’s a little bit fearful of expressing. Uh,
She has gone several levels deeper during the interview and to me that’s, uh, the mark of
a process of therapy that in the long run will be successful. Perhaps through this whole
interview, it’s evident that, uh, following the client’s experiencing, being a companion to
the client in whatever, uh, is going on in her does lead to opening up new, uh, areas of
concern, new explorations, leads her into new, uh, territories.]

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 38

This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may
not be sold.
In this interview the responses of the therapist (C) (Carl Rogers), and the client
(S) (Sylvia) are numbered for easy reference.
Carl Rogers Demonstrates Client-Centered Therapy
Transcription from the Video of the Film
"Struggle for Acceptance”
Session 5 with Sylvia - 1975
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (1975). The struggle for self-acceptance.]
[Commentaries are typed in brackets and italics to distinguish from the actual interview.]
Carl Commentary 1: [This is my fifth interview with Sylvia. The fourth interview had
been held on the previous day. Prior to that there had been the three interviews a year
earlier. The interview will be shown as it was recorded, but with comments both from
