======================================================================
Sylvia 5th Interview (1975)
Therapist: Dr. Carl Rogers
======================================================================

Session 5 with Sylvia - 1975
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (1975). The struggle for self-acceptance.]
[Commentaries are typed in brackets and italics to distinguish from the actual interview.]
Carl Commentary 1: [This is my fifth interview with Sylvia. The fourth interview had
been held on the previous day. Prior to that there had been the three interviews a year
earlier. The interview will be shown as it was recorded, but with comments both from
Sylvia and from myself at points where we felt we wished to clarify what was going
on,uh, or to make some comment about what was going on.]
Carl: Well, where would you like to start this morning?
Sylvia1: Well, uh, I want to tell you about something that I've been thinking about and
that’s it's a, a sharing more than (C: M-hm.) telling you a problem. (C: M-hm.)
C Commentary 2: [So often clients and counselors get the feeling that, uh, the
relationship is one which must be filled only with problems. Uh, Sylvia gives a little
indication of that, this is just a sharing, it's not a problem.]
S1 (continued): And that is I’ve just recently noticed in myself that I've been learning.
(She laughs a little.) (C: M-hm.) And that's a big deal. Uh, I hear people say all the
time, “Oh, I've learned so much, I learned this and I learned that and that was such a
learning experience.” And I, all these years that I've been grown up, I haven't felt any
learning, and I feel, “Well, what did you learn and how did you know that you
learned it?” And it was a mystery to me. (C: M-hm.) And just the last few weeks, or
actually I've been realizing in the last year mainly is that I’ve learned some things (C:
M-hm.) and I know I've learned them and I, I know that, okay, that I'm at this point
and with a certain situation or idea and that six months ago or three months ago it was
different. (C: Uh-huh.) And so I'm feeling my learning and that's really exciting.
C Commentary 3: [A relationship should be one in which good feelings have just as
much place as bad feelings, and here she's bringing out some very positive feelings aboutherself, which is a healthy and valid part of a counseling relationship. It's always
exciting to me to, uh, hear a client telling of positive steps which, uh, he or she has been
taking, and here Sylvia sounds confident as she's doing something that she has decided to
do in her own way, not necessarily following all the books, but doing what she feels and
experiences is right.]
C1: And it’s the awareness of it that's new. (S: Uh-huh. Yeah.) That you're beginning to
realize, “Hey, I am different in this respect, (S: Uh-huh.) I've learned something.”
S2: I've changed. (C: Uh-huh.) And I can see the difference and feel the difference. (C:
Uh-huh.) Yeah.
C2: What are some of those differences?
S3: Well, (small laugh) um, I, I've made a decision to be more strict with my children
(C: M-hm, m-hm.) and to, uh, to listen to them but decide that I'm their mother and
I know many things they don't, and that I will make many more decisions than (C:
M-hm.) I've made in the past. And uhC3: M-hm, m-hm. Sounds as though you feel a bit stronger that way.
S4: Yes. And and I've been trying it. (C: Uh, m-hm.) Trying being the more strict person
and it's working beautifully. (C: Uh-huh.) Uh, they at first they, you know, have
their little resistance or whatever it is but then we go on with the program, which is
my program more, (C: M-hm.) and I feel a lot better about that as being uh uh
helping children to adjust to the world.
C4: I mean, sounds, sounds like you feel more like a grown-up mother.
S5: M-hm. Capable. (C: M-hm.) Of making appropriate decisions. (C: M-hm.) For
them. And another area is sex. And, uh, and I, I've done a lot of things in the past
year, in the past mainly year that I haven't done before. That is, I've had intercourse
with a few different men (C: M-hm.) and put myself in situations where before I
was absolutely unwilling to do because of my fears and, and I've learned some things
about myself. Like I know a lot more right now today about what kind of sexual
relationship, what kind of intimate relationships that I want to have with men and
that feels good. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) Beca ... and, um, and it only came through, uh,
risking I mean there was no, it only became through trying things out, there was no
amount (C: Uh-huh, uh-huh.) There was no amount of, of therapy or reading or
thinking or talking (C: M-hm.) that helped me to learn those things, (C: M-hm.)
but it was feeling strong enough within myself that I can take chances.
C5: So risking has been the road to learning (S: Yeah.) in the sexual area.
S6: Uh-huh. (C: M-hm.) And it is with my children (C: M-hm.) and it is with relating
to people in many ways, not just sexually. (She smiles.) (C: M-hm.) Other ways too.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 40

(C: M-hm.)
C Commentary 4: [Sylvia is showing a lot of risking behavior. She's risking a good deal
to talk about things like this on film. But what's more important is that she has come to
the point in her own life where, where she realizes that her own experience is the best
guide for her, not books, not therapy, not anything outside of herself. It is her own
experience from which she can learn, and here she is learning in a very sensitive and, uh,
personal area and is willing to share that with us.]
S6 (continued): Reaching out to people and approaching strangers and, uh ...
C6: Taking all kinds of risks that you hadn't before.
S7: Some. More, (C: M-hm.) which, I mean I, I don't know about all kinds. (C: Yeah.)
Quite a few, and it's been exciting (C: M-hm.) and hard.
C7: And I guess that leads to a, uh, to a deeper kind of learning, or at any rate, a learning
that you feel more sure of. I guess, I get a sense of assurance in what you're talking
about. An assurance in you.
C Commentary 5: [One thing that has been true with Sylvia in every interview we've had
is that she thinks carefully about what she says, she thinks carefully about what I say,
and when what I say is not correct, doesn't match her experience, she's quite willing to
correct me. She is very precise in both describing her own feelings and also in making
sure that my response to them is also accurate.]
S8: Well, yes. Yes and no. (C: Uh-huh.) And I ... I ... feel more im... like I, I was saying
before, I feel more immature and more and I'm more aware of my immaturity. (C:
M-hm.) They're both, uh, a part of each other. (C: M-hm.) And uh, does that
make, does that, I guess I'm thinking that it just sounds crazy.
C8: No, I don't
S9: To say that I feel more mature because I know I'm how, I know more about how
immature I am.
C9: Uh-huh. No, that makes a lot of sense to me.
S Commentary 1: [I was surprised at what I said made sense to him. I think that I
thought that it made sense to me, but that doesn't necessarily mean it would make sense
to other people. I mean, it made in my own system of what was said. It felt good that he
could understand me and he knew I that, that it made sense to him too.]
C Commentary 6: [It's important to Sylvia to make sure that she's accurately understood.
Can anyone understand how she can be more mature by being aware of her immaturity?
Well, to me, that's quite understandable, but it's clear that she wants to make certain that
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 41

my understanding extends to that degree.]
S10: It does.
C10: Uh-huh. Because you’re, you're uh more aware of all aspects of yourself (S: Mhm.) and it sounds a more acceptant of them too. “Yes, I'm mature in certain ways
(S: M-hm.) and here's some ways I know I'm immature.”
S11: And I didn't know that before, (C: Uh-huh.) or I, I knew I felt uncomfortable that I
didn't understand it. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) But that's related to something I've been
thinking about, I think, about being here with you and, uh, and telling myself two
things. (C: M-hm.) One is, “Oh, you're just a, I'm just a dependent personality,”
you know, Carl Rogers or blah-blah-blah-blah, don't, I don't run my own life. (C:
M-hm.) I go for help a lot. (C: M-hm.) And then I tell myself I’ve always been so
strong and so together and having everything so worked out in my head that I don't
allow myself to, to be helpless in a situation where it might be (C: M-hm.) good
for me. (C: M-hm.) Like right now here with you, I would like to be more helpless,
which to me means open, I think. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) To what to us and, uh, and I
see myself being, uh, together and not being helpless. (C: M-hm.)
S Commentary 2: [I think at that point I was feeling concern that I was just gonna go to
another session of being all in control of things and and rattling on and on. I probably
made a conscious decision that that I have to do something to, to break that and, uh,
which was talk about it, talk about my fear. My fear was or concern that I wouldn't learn
anything.]
C11: Sounds as though you, you voice that as a conflict, but it sounds as though really
you're more on the, on the side of the second aspect that, uh, uh, to be open and,
and in that sense helpless and vulnerable, I guess might be a possible term too, um,
is something you, you really believe that's what you are, rather than that you're a
totally dependent person and really helpless and have to, have to run for help. I sort
of get the feeling you like this aspect of you that is able to be with me in a way that
is, uh, more open, more vulnerable perhaps.
S12: Well, I like it and I also scold myself for being dependent, (C: M-hm.) so there's
C12: There are the two sides, uh-huh.
S13: there's something missing in the middle to connect, (C: M-hm.) and I it seems like
you might have been talking about that and I still didn't hear it.
C13: (Nods.) M-hm. (S: Mm.) So really to get it more accurately, you scold yourself
for for being dependent, for, for wanting (S: M-hm.) to be here, for example, with
me, (S: M-hm.) and yet at the same time you, you feel. uh, well, that's good, I, I
really like that, but where's the, where's the integration of those two, uh, points of
view. (S: M-hm.) (Sylvia nods.)
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 42

S Commentary 3: [That seemed to me like a very excellent, um, not paraphrase, but
when he, you know, tells me back (C: M-hm.) what he thinks I meant, it, um, solidified
what I expressed in the previous comment about that there was something missing. It
made more sense to me.]
S14: That's right. (small laugh) (pause of 7 seconds) May I hold your hands again?
C14: Sure. M-hm. (They lean closer and clasp hands and remain holding hands.)
S15: To feel that old feeling.
C15: Okay.
S Commentary 4: [When we did that filming in A_____, we held each others' hands the
whole time, and I imagine that it occurred me that it might be good to do that again. I
feel good. At that time, I, I wanted to get away from being in my head so completely the
whole time, experiencing.]
C Commentary 7: [I felt very comfortable during this holding of hands. Uh, I'm reminded
of a friend of mine who said that he did eye therapy and, uh, in a sense that's what this
was. Our eyes were very much in contact, and, uh, I think as much was going on at a
non-verbal way as in a verbal way. It was a close relationship, and we both experienced
it that way.]
S16: (Clears throat.) (pause of 11 seconds) I would like to be less, uh, less strong right
now. I would like to give myself the gift of not having to be sensible (C: M-hm.)
and reasonable and (C: M-hm, m-hm.) Also the protection, (C: M-hm.) protect,
(C: M-hm.) protect myself.
C16: M-hm, m-hm, m-hm. Really would be giving yourself a gift if you could just kind
of let go (S: M-hm.) and not, uh, not be so (S: M-hm.) competent (S: M-hm.)
and able. (S: Mm.) (She nods.) (pause of 5 seconds)
C Commentary 8: [It seems clear that the reason she wants to hold my hands is that she
wants to experience something that is very frightening to her, namely to drop her
competent, reasonable, strong self and let herself be some of the weakness and
vulnerability that she is.]
S17: And I think it helps to touch ( C: M-hm.) (Carl nods.) you, to, to, to let go of the
shoulds, of my (small laugh)
C17: M-hm, m-hm. And you feel some contact and maybe you can say, “Well, maybe I
don't have to be so strong, so (S: M-hm, mm.) Maybe I can just let go more.”
S18: (pause of 5 seconds) Yes. (small laugh) (She sighs.) ( pause of 22 seconds) I
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 43

want to get away from all, um, my rationalizing right now this minute, and I don't
know how to do that (C: M-hm.) except to shut up. (Carl nods.) (C: M-hm, mhm.) And, (pause of 5 seconds) so it's not like I have so much a desire to sit and
not talk and look in your eyes as I have a desire to not be the way I am all the time.
(C: M-hm.) And I don't know yet (C: M-hm, m-hm.) what else to do. (C: Mhm.)
C Commentary 9: [In the interviews that we held a year ago, the silences were very long
and Sylvia found a, a great deal of security and, uh, seemed to profit a great deal from
holding my hands during the interview, and here she, uh, returns to the pattern of a year
ago. It's another indication of the fact that these interviews with her perhaps rest more
solidly on just the fact of the relationship than they do even on the content of what, uh,
she's saying and talking about.]
C18: Have to be kind of silent, to let go of that rational and rationalizing part of you.
S19: M-hm. (pause of 25 seconds) It feels easier to focus on, uh, in this position that I'm
in now with you I feel more focused, (C: M-hm.) (He nods.) yeah.
C19: Are there any things that sort of come bubbling up?
S20: Yeah, I know it's something I want to talk about. (She smiles.)
C20: Okay. M-hm. (pause of 10 seconds) (She smiles.) But it's not easy, huh.
S21: No, it's not easy and I'm enjoying the richness of feeling (C: M-hm.) your hands
this way and letting go of some more of, of the camera business (C: M-hm.) and
the ... (C: M-hm, m-hm.) And, uh, and the fear about bringing up something that
(laughs) (clears throat) and knowing that in about fifteen minutes it'll all seem, um,
(sighs, smiling) I don't know not quite as serious. (C: M-hm.)
S Commentary 5: [It just had to take its own time for me to get to where I could feel like I
could say the words that I needed to say. It was almost like waiting and just like, uh, you
know, what else is new while I'm waiting? For something that took a natural process that
it had to take.]
C Commentary 10: [If anyone has a doubt about the value of silences, it should be
removed by this interchange. Sylvia's saying, “I'm doing more work when I'm silent than
I am when I'm talking.”]
S Commentary 6: [His specific comments or the content of his comments is not
necessarily helpful as opposed to not helpful, but what it does do that is valuable is that it
gives me something to bounce against. It's a stimulation to better focus myself.]
S21 (continued): There's something I've been wanting to talk over with you.

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 44

C21: Okay.
S22: Good. I'm real attracted to black people. (C: M-hm.) And, uh, that's about the
craziest part of me, um, I'm ashamed (C: Mm.) Um, I'm embarrassed, not right
now this minute, but when I'm out walking around. (Carl is nodding.) (C: When it
happens, m-hm.) And living my life.
C22: You feel what an awful thing it is that I'm attracted to black people. (S: M-hm.)
C Commentary 11: [I think that from the time that she first wanted to hold my hands, I
felt that she probably was going to make use of that closer relationship to get to
something that she hadn't been able to express before, and now she's taking really a
great risk in talking about something very private, very personal.]
S23: Not, and not all the black people I see (C: M-hm.) but a lot. (C: M-hm.) And, uh,
like the black people that I talked it over with, it seems, it doesn't seem like any
problem at all, they understand perfectly. (C: M-hm.) And, but my family, I think
it's a real painful situation for them when I have as many black friends as I do. (C:
M-hm, m-hm.) AndC23: That sounds like not only your family looks down on it or something but that you
scold yourself for it too.
S24: Uh-huh, right. I, I think there's something wrong with me.
C24: Yeah, that's it.
S25: Um. But it doesn'tC25: “What kind of a crazy person am I that I feel attracted (S: Well, sick...) to so many
blacks?”
S26: Sick, sick I think of it as
C26: Sick, that's
S27: and ne... neurotic, um. (C: Hm.) Strange. (C: Mm.) (She closes her eyes and
clears her throat.) (pause of 7 seconds)
C27: You really feel that there's something sick in you that causes you to have so many
black friends.
S28: (Opening her eyes) Well, I keep looking for a reasonable explanation (C: M-hm.)
and there is none. (She laughs a little)
C28: So there isn't any reason except that you feel that way.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 45

S29: M-hm. And I ...
C29: And that isn't good enough.
S30: Well, I, I, I've been struggling so long to accept that in myself and I'm still fighting.
It's like I'm fighting to accept that in myself and, and letting go rather than thinking
it's a terrible thing (C: M-hm.) and and that I can't let other people know. (C:
Hm, m-hm, m-hm.) And, uh,
C30: You feel “I should not feel that way. I shouldn't be that way. Sick.”
C Commentary 12: [I think by that response I was trying to exaggerate her feelings in
order to assist her in, uh, becoming more accepting of them, but as I, uh, listen
to it I think I might have responded more powerfully by responding to
her struggle to accept herself as a person who is attracted to blacks.]
S31: Like when I, wh ... , I imagine when I meet a black person that I am attracted
to, that that person will know (He nods.) (C: M-hm, mm-hm.) and I always wonder if
they can tell.
C31: Mm, see if it shows. (S: Uh-huh.) M-hm, m-hm.
S32: And that they'll think I'm strange. (C: M-hm.) M-hm. And it has something to do
with all the black/white sex stuff that goes on, like, um, black women and white
men which is very foreign to me, I have very little thinking or, um, concern about
that. But the black men/white women thing, (C: M-hm.) um. and I'm attracted to
a lot of black men. (C: M-hm.) Yeah.
C32: It has something to do with the sexual attraction.
S33: I know, yeah, it does, I know it does. (C: M-hm.) But it's not just that, it's also
(C: M-hm.) children and and women and lifestyle (C: M-hm.) and as I see it
through my tunnel vision, which I do. (C: Uh-huh.) (clears her throat)
C33: So I guess you're saying, um, yeah, there's a sexual element in it but
I'm also attracted to their way of living.
S34: M-hm. That I see. (C: Yeah.) And I, but I think what I see isn't what is.
C34: (He nods.) That's partly your fantasy or something. (Sylvia nods.) (pause of 8
seconds)
S35: Maybe putting that, that, this on this film will help me that (She smiles.) stand on
the ground and be who I am. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) And not be so ashamed, so
embarrassed and so, (C: M-hm.) um, uncomfortable.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 46

C35: In a way you're saying it out loud and really in a wa ..., in a sense, publicly, may
help you to feel “I don't need to be so ashamed of that.” (S: M-hm.)
C Commentary 13: [I've filmed a number of interviews, but I never had a client
knowingly make use of the filming to try to gain more acceptance of self and clearly
that's what Sylvia is doing in this interchange. By putting herself clearly on record, she
feels perhaps then she will feel less ashamed, less sick, more, uh, truly acceptant of the
person that she is and the experiences that she has.]
S36: And I tell myself I should be joyful, I mean, (C: M-hm.) (She laughs a little.) why,
why negative? (C: M-hm.) And I, I guess, you know, the culture or I don't know, I
(sighs) (pause of 6 seconds)
C36: But you feel disapproved of probably, certainly by your family and maybe by the
culture in this respect.
S37: My friends don't understand. (C: M-hm.) My white friends.
C37: M-hm, m-hm. (He nods.) (pause of 10 seconds) Makes you feel different. (S:
Hm, hm.) Set apart or something like that. (pause of 6 seconds)
S38: Well, sometimes I feel different but I know a lot of other people, I believe a lot of
other people feel the same way. (C: M-hm.) and I know a lot of other white
women are attracted to black men. So I believe that's common.
C38: So that somehow you know you're not alone in this.
C Commentary 14: [Here's another example of the fact that expressing all the negative
attitudes she has toward her own attraction to blacks leads her to realize this really is
not so bad after all; there are positive sides of it. Other people, other women feel the
same way.]
S39: But it seems like the strength of my feelings and, uh, the on-goingness and my de ...,
my desire to identify with the black culture and, (C: M-hm, m-hm) um, is. is what
seems out of proportion to me. That I feel out of proportion about it. (They both
nod.)
C39: M-hm. So Okay, other women feel the same way but not to the degree that you do,
you think. (S: M-hm.) That's kind of out of (S: M-hm.) Out of scale.
S40: Or in general to the degree too, not just man/woman, but (C: M-hm.) people.
(pause of 15 seconds) Maybe I, (small laugh) it'll come a time accepting that part
of myself.
C40: Maybe someday you won't be ashamed of yourself for that.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 47

S41: M-hm. Maybe someday I can be proud of myself. (C: M-hm.) And for what I
believe and feel. (C: M-hm.) And I'm gradually learning to do that.
C41: Uh-huh, m-hm. So, perhaps what you are and what you feel will be something you
can take real satisfaction in instead of feeling (S: M-hm.) how shameful.
S42: M-hm. And to me it's it's a sign of my growth is being able to do what I'm doing
with you now, you'll make a film. (C: M-hm.) (She laughs.) (C: M-hm, m-hm, mhm, m-hm, m-hm.) It's a real brazen thing to do. (C: Yeah.) M-hm.
C42: Feel this is a risk. (S: M-hm.) And that's a sign of learning and of growth.
S43: M-hm. Well, also it somehow it's a little different from a risk in the sense of some of
my friends say, “A film? Wh... What do you want to do that for?” I mean, there's
suspiciousness about it and …
C43: M-hm, m-hm. (He nods.) So that's seen as another strange part of you.
S44: Well, not so much, I mean, that's not a
C44: Not so.
S45: It doesn't bother me. (clears throat) (pause of 11 seconds) Sometimes I, well, right
now (She laughs and he nods.) sometimes, I have the sense of talking away what
we were talking about and I'm wondering, if I went away, if I withdraw from the
subject, uh, what's your perspective? It seems like we were talking about my
attraction to black people and now we're not. And I'm, I don't know, like did we
finish talking about it or did I withdraw?
S Commentary 7: [My sense is that I was feeling confused about what was going on.]
C Commentary 15:[I think this is a sample of Sylvia's sharp awareness of her own
experiencing. I don't believe that in content we had left the subject of her attraction to
blacks. But she realizes in herself that somehow she has withdrawn from that. She's, as
she says, talked away from it. Obviously, that's because it has been a, a frightening
subject to her. Perhaps also because she feels she's gone as far as she can go with it at
the present time.]
S45 (continued): Um
C45: It's more of your analyzing it, isn't it, trying to think (She nods.) about what's
happening. “Did I run away from it? Or was I finished with it?” (S: M-hm.) Or
continue think about it
S46: analyze it (small laugh)
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 48

C46: Instead of asking, “Do I feel as though I'm finished with it? (S: M-hm.) Do I feel
as though I'm escaping from it?”
S47: I like that. I like your your questions, or comments. (C: M-hm.) Do I feel finished?
(pause of 10 seconds) No, I don't, I don't feel, I don't know (He nods.) about
escaping (C: M-hm.) and feeling finished, it's
C47: The feeling is one of uncertainty.
S48: M-hm. (She nods.) (pause of 35 seconds) Well I I feel like I want to go back and
listen to what we just talked about, (C: M-hm.) that I didn't hear it very well. (C:
M-hm, m-hm, m-hm, m-hm, m-hm.) And ...
C Commentary 16: [This is one of the commonest experiences when a person delves into
areas that are sensitive, where they've exposed themselves in, in ways that make them
very vulnerable. Sylvia, like many other clients, hardly knows what she has said because
it has come so close to her inner feelings, because it’s such a delicate experience.
Incidentally, this is one point where a wrong response on the part of the counselor can
be very frightening and very threatening because her inner self is really very exposed at
this point. This inability to remember is the, uh, defense of the self against being changed
too rapidly. It probably would be very good for her to hear this later and to begin to
accept more fully what she's just been expressing.]
C48: “What did I say? What did I feel?” You'd like to have a rerun of it and it
S49: M-hm. Like I just went jabber-jabber-jabber-jabber. (C: M-hm.) And all that. (C:
M-hm.) And soC49: Sounds like you scold yourself for that, as though, “Oh, I just talk talk-talk.” (She
nods.) (S: M-hm.) It didn't sound like just talk-talk-talk to me.
S50: It didn't?
C50: No.
C Commentary 17: [Throughout these interviews, my own feelings have been largely
empathic and caring ones. Here's the first time that I express some other feeling of my
own. I simply couldn't permit her to scold herself for what she's been doing, and so I
said, “It doesn't sound like, uh, just talk-talk-talk to me,” which was a very real feeling
on my part at that moment.]
S Commentary 8: [At that time I had the feeling that Carl was really asking me
something that he wanted to know. Like genuinely interested and concerned about that.]
S51: (pause of 6 seconds) Well, I would like to hear it again, (He nods.) and it has, it,
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 49

and slowed down somehow, (C: M-hm.) and I now (small laugh) I could think
like taking your hand and looking at you and slowing down. (C: M-hm, m-hm.)
And then when I'm slowing--and that's what I want to do ... (C: M-hm.) But while
I'm doing it, I'm scolding myself. “What are you doing this for?”
C51: M-hm. (pause of 5 seconds) Let me give you a very brief rerun of part of it. You
were saying, “I'm ashamed of myself for being attracted to black men. Uh, I know
many other women have some of the same feeling, but it seems to me I have that
feeling disproportionately strong and uh my family is critical of that, the culture is
critical. Um, I'd like to be able to accept those feelings in myself. Maybe I'm
making a little bit of progress along that line, but still it does seem a need to be a a
strange part of me that I don't understand.” (She nods.) (pause of 10 seconds)
S52: That's right.
C52: “And part of that attraction is sexual but I'm also attracted to their children, to the
way they live, to a lot of things about them.” (S: M-hm.)
C Commentary 18: [Sometimes when I show what an accurate listener I am, I feel proud
of myself and I do in this moment.]
S53: And what I, what you said that strikes me the most is it’s the part of me I don't
understand, (C: M-hm.) it's a part of me I don't understand.
C53: It just is, but you can't quite uh can't quite get at the reasons for it. You have to have
the reasons.
S54: (Laughs a little) (pause of 5 seconds) And I don't know why I have to have the
reasons, (C: m-hm.) I don't have to explain to anybody. (C: M-hm.) So it seems
like I don't have to have a reason. (She smiles.)
C54: M-hm. (pause of 20 seconds) So maybe the intellectual understanding isn't as
important as you thought it was.
S55: I think the acceptance is what's most important, (C: M-hm, m-hm.) my acceptance.
(C: M-hm.)
C Commentary 19: [As she has shown throughout the, uh, interview, as she says, she
analyzes and analyzes. She has to see the reasons for all of her behavior, and
now she's taking a little bit lighter look at that, and realizing, "I don't have to have a
reason for every bit of my behavior, I don't have to understand all of it. I can simply
accept it. Perhaps I can simply accept it." I admire Sylvia's courage in being willing to
voice the very, uh, intimate feelings she has on film. I believe that both the expression of
those feelings will be constructive for her and that the willingness to share them with a
wider audience will also have a positive effect in her life.]

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 50

C55: “If I could accept it, I wouldn't have to understand in the sense of knowing the
reasons.”
S56: (Nods.) Or explain to anybody. (He nods.) (C: M-hm, m-hm, m-hm.) M-hm.
C56: Sounds like that's what you're doing in imagination a lot, trying to explain it to
somebody.
S57: M-hm. (pause of 25 seconds) It seems like I'll probably never understand it. (Both
nod.) So I can make life a lot easier for myself by not trying. (They both nod.)
C57: M-hm. (pause of 5 seconds) It may be one of those things that if you can accept it,
you wouldn't need to have all the explanations. (pause of 9 seconds)
S58: Wonder what (She closes her eyes for a moment, sighs and clears her throat.) what
keeps me, um, feeling like I need to justify myself. (C: M-hm.) Like that's a more
basic
C58: M-hm. It's a broader statement of it.
S59: than about a particular view, accepting myself about this and about that.
C59: M-hm. You would in general feel “I have to justify myself with proper reasons.”
S60: M-hm. (pause of 20 seconds) (smiles) Well, do you do that? Do you
C60: I suspect we all do, some. (S: Yeah.) M-hm.
S61: So there's nobody that just (Both laugh.) floats along on their (Both laugh.)
intuition. That’s not it either. So what I need is more balance really. (C: M-hm.)
Not that I’m wrong to justify it, but that I can be more, justify it less and feel more,
(Both nod.) (C: M-hm, m-hm.) and feel comfortable. (C: M-hm.)
S Commentary 9: [This experience that I had with Carl is, uh, real special to me and, uh,
one of the things about it that feels real close to me is the emotional safety I felt with him.
That there was somehow a, a boundary or a fence or a something that, uh, separated the
space that I was in with Carl from the rest of the world and inside that space I was very
safe and I would not be hurt. I didn't have to have any fear that I would be hurt no matter
what I said or did, and the focus of my thinking was how very safe that felt. Another thing
I felt from him that I think has affected me some over this time is that I felt, uh, like
support from him to be myself, to listen to myself and to respond to myself and to care
about, to put myself first. I think about how my life might have been changed by my
experiences with Carl. I think Carl's caring for me in the way that he did, his, uh,
modeling, helping me to learn to care for myself, where like maybe my most important
resource would be myself. (C: Yeah.) So it seems to me that in his style of relating
there's a lot of support to do that, a lot of encouragement and influence to listen to
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 51

myself.]
END OF SESSION

Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 52

This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be
sold.
Kathy Interview by Carl Rogers (Circa 1975)
[Source: Shostrom, E. L. (1975). Three approaches to psychotherapy II [Film].
Orange, CA.]
Rogers: I want to meet this client as a person. And I want our encounter to be that
of two persons. I have no desire to have advance information regarding
her. I'll work with whatever she wishes to reveal of herself. It's my hope
that I can first of all be myself. Be present. Be real in the relationship. I
usually find it easy, also, to feel a caring for the client. But I can't predict
in advance whether I will feel that. I would like to let myself enter into her
inner world of feelings and perceptions as accurately and as sensitively as
I can. In order to experience that kind of empathy, I'11 need to lay aside,
as far as possible, my own biases and preconceptions. The extent to which
I can do that will to a considerable degree determine the progress which
she is able to make in the time we have together. I feel I'm a responsible
therapist. I'm responsible for doing my best to create a facilitative climate
in which she can explore her feelings in the way that she desires, move
toward the goals that she wishes to achieve. It's in this deep sense that my
approach to therapy is centered in the client. Aiming to empower him or
her to search out and experience the areas of conflict or pain, to perceive
self in new ways, to choose to follow new options in behavior. It is my
own self I find feelings other than those of caring and of understanding I'll
feel free to express these; but as my own feelings, not as any judgment of
or guide for the client. Or, especially on a first interview, I may have no
other feelings than a prizing of the client and a desire to in-dwell in her
experience. There's no way I can tell in advance. For me each encounter
with a client is fresh, unpredictable, often enriching to my learning as well
as hopefully, enriching the self-learning of the client. So I look forward
with eagerness to whatever our time together may bring.

